*************************
OPNFV FUNCTEST user guide
*************************

.. toctree::
   :numbered:
   :maxdepth: 2


============
Introduction
============

DOCUMENT IS IN PROGRESS FOR BRAHMAPUTRA


=============================
Description of the test cases
=============================

vPing
=====

The goal of this test can be described as follow::

 vPing testcase
 +-------------+                   +-------------+
 |             |                   |             |
 |             |                   |             |
 |             |     Boot VM1      |             |
 |             +------------------>|             |
 |             |                   |             |
 |             |     Get IP VM1    |             |
 |             +------------------>|             |
 |   Tester    |                   |   System    |
 |             |     Boot VM2      |    Under    |
 |             +------------------>|     Test    |
 |             | VM2 pings VM1     |             |
 |             |                   |             |
 |             | Check console log |             |
 |             |    If ping:       |             |
 |             |      exit OK      |             |
 |             |    else (timeout) |             |
 |             |      exit KO      |             |
 |             |                   |             |
 |             |                   |             |
 +-------------+                   +-------------+


This example, using OpenStack Python clients can be considered as an "Hello World" example and may be modified for future use.

Since SR1, some code has been added in order to push the results (status and duration) into a centralized test result database.

SDN Controllers
===============

OpenDaylight
------------

The ODL suite consists in a set of basic tests inherited from ODL project. 
The suite tests the creation and deletion of network, subnet, port though OpenDaylight and Neutron.

The list of tests can be described as follow:
 * Restconf.basic: Get the controller modules via Restconf
 * Neutron.Networks

   * Check OpenStack Networks :: Checking OpenStack Neutron for known networks
   * Check OpenDaylight Networks :: Checking OpenDaylight Neutron API
   * Create Network :: Create new network in OpenStack
   * Check Network :: Check Network created in OpenDaylight
   * Neutron.Networks :: Checking Network created in OpenStack are pushed

 * Neutron.Subnets

   * Check OpenStack Subnets :: Checking OpenStack Neutron for known Subnets
   * Check OpenDaylight subnets :: Checking OpenDaylight Neutron API
   * Create New subnet :: Create new subnet in OpenStack
   * Check New subnet :: Check new subnet created in OpenDaylight
   * Neutron.Subnets :: Checking Subnets created in OpenStack are pushed

 * Neutron.Ports

   * Check OpenStack ports :: Checking OpenStack Neutron for known ports
   * Check OpenDaylight ports :: Checking OpenDaylight Neutron API
   * Create New Port :: Create new port in OpenStack
   * Check New Port :: Check new subnet created in OpenDaylight
   * Neutron.Ports :: Checking Port created in OpenStack are pushed

 * Delete Ports

   * Delete previously created subnet in OpenStack
   * Check subnet deleted in OpenDaylight
   * Check subnet deleted in OpenStack

 * Delete network

   * Delete previously created network in OpenStack
   * Check network deleted in OpenDaylight
   * Check network deleted in OpenStack


ONOS
----
TODO

OpenContrail
------------

TODO

VIM
===

Tempest
-------

.. _Tempest: http://docs.openstack.org/developer/tempest/overview.html

Tempest_ is the OpenStack Integration Test Suite. We use Rally to run Tempest suite.

The Tempest.conf configuration file is automatically generated by Rally then the Tempest suite is run, each test duration is measured.

We considered the smoke test suite for Arno.

The goal of this test is to  to check the basic OpenStack functionality on a fresh installation.



Rally bench test suites
-----------------------

.. _Rally: https://wiki.openstack.org/wiki/Rally

Rally bench test suite consist in a suite of light performance tests on some of the OpenStack components.

The goal of this test suite is to test the different modules of OpenStack and get significant figures that could help us to define telco Cloud KPI.

The OPNFV scenarios are based on the collection of the existing Rally_ scenarios:
 * authenticate
 * cinder
 * nova
 * requests
 * glance
 * keystone
 * neutron
 * quotas


This test suite provides performance information on VIM (OpenStack) part.

No SLA were defined for release 1, we just consider whether the tests are passed or failed.

In the future SLA shall be defined (e.g. accepting booting time for a given image with a given flavour).

Through its integration in Continuous Integration, the evolution of the performance of these tests shall also be considered.

vIMS
====

TODO

Feature projects
================

TODO

==============
Manual testing
==============

TODO

=================
Automated testing
=================

TODO

===============
Troubleshooting
===============

TODO

==========
References
==========

OPNFV main site: opnfvmain_.

OPNFV functional test page: opnfvfunctest_.

IRC support chan: #opnfv-testperf

.. _opnfvmain: http://www.opnfv.org
.. _opnfvfunctest: https://wiki.opnfv.org/opnfv_functional_testing
.. _`OpenRC`: http://docs.openstack.org/user-guide/common/cli_set_environment_variables_using_openstack_rc.html
.. _`Rally installation procedure`: https://rally.readthedocs.org/en/latest/tutorial/step_0_installation.html
.. _`config_test.py` : https://git.opnfv.org/cgit/functest/tree/testcases/config_functest.py
.. _`config_functest.yaml` : https://git.opnfv.org/cgit/functest/tree/testcases/config_functest.yaml
